The Bible is a modern-day treasure.
It reveals the satisfying truth about God,
life, and our hope for the future.
What’s more,
it contains another priceless treasure
—God’s personal name, Jehovah.
How Jehovah preserved his name
in the Holy Scriptures,
against all attempts to remove it,
is a fascinating story.
And it’s told here in the Bible Museum
at world headquarters in Warwick.
Let’s take the tour.
At the museum’s entry,
the divine name is shown in various languages
a total of 7,216 times.
That’s how many times it appears
in the New World Translation
of the Holy Scriptures.
Jehovah always made his name known,
even to the very first humans.
When Cain was born,
Eve declared:
“I have produced a male child
with the help of Jehovah.”
After that time,
people knew and used God’s name.
The oldest example
of the divine name in Hebrew letters
is on the Moabite Stone
from the ninth century B.C.E.
Moabite King Mesha
boasted against Israel:
“I took from it the vessels of Jehovah,
and offered them before Chemosh.”
There’s also evidence that in ancient times
God’s name was used in everyday life.
This silver scroll
from the seventh century B.C.E.
is the earliest known inscription
of a Bible text containing God’s name.
It reads:
“May Jehovah bless you and keep you.
May Jehovah make his face to shine on you.”
Most important, God’s name
was in ancient copies of the Bible text.
The Fouad Papyrus
from the first century B.C.E.
is a fragment of the Greek Septuagint,
the first known translation
of the Hebrew Scriptures into Greek.
Here’s Deuteronomy 32:3:
“For I will declare the name of Jehovah.”
Although the text is in Greek,
the divine name is written in Hebrew.
Greek-speaking Jews
in Jesus’ day used the Septuagint.
So when Jesus read and taught
from the Scriptures,
people heard him use the divine name.
Sadly, though,
by the third century C.E.,
God’s name was removed
from the Septuagint
and replaced with the title “Lord.”
As an example,
the Vatican Codex
from the fourth century C.E.
includes the text
of the Greek Septuagint
but omits God’s name.
Deuteronomy 32:3 here reads:
“For I will declare the name of the LORD.”
But Jehovah
wouldn’t allow his name to be lost.
It was never removed
from Hebrew copies of the Bible.
The Aleppo Codex
was copied by Jewish scribes
around the year 930 C.E.
The same verse,
Deuteronomy 32:3, says in Hebrew:
“For I will declare the name of Jehovah.”
Still,
for centuries, most people didn’t have
a Bible in their own language,
nor one that contained God’s name.
The Latin Vulgate,
translated around 405 C.E.,
omitted the divine name.
It became the official translation
of the Catholic Church for over 1,000 years.
But a new technology triggered events
that would soon make
the Bible widely available
and in fresh translations
that returned God’s name
to its rightful place.
About 1453,
Johannes Gutenberg
produced an important edition
of the Latin Vulgate.
It was the first Bible
printed using movable type.
This is an original page
from a Gutenberg Bible.
While only some 180 Bibles were made,
his invention sparked a printing revolution.
Just 20 years later,
Anton Koberger was printing
up to 1,000 Bibles per run,
making it the first mass-produced Bible.
On display is an original copy
of the second edition
of Koberger’s Latin Bible from 1477.
Then, in the early 1500’s,
Bible scholars took a renewed interest
in the original Bible languages.
For the very first time,
the original-language Hebrew
and Greek Scriptures were printed together.
This is the Complutensian Polyglot,
printed between 1514 and 1517.
A polyglot is a book
with text in several languages
arranged in columns.
In the Complutensian Polyglot,
the Bible text appears in Latin,
Hebrew, Aramaic, and Greek.
Comparing the Hebrew text with the Latin,
scholars could see where God’s name
had been replaced
in the Latin Vulgate with “LORD.”
But would seeing the divine name
in the original Hebrew text
lead Bible translators to restore
God’s name in their translations?
Indeed, some did!
In 1551,
Sebastian Castellio published
his fresh Latin translation of the Bible.
He appears to be the first
to use God’s name consistently
in a Latin translation
of the Hebrew Scriptures.
Translations into other languages
were also using God’s name.
In 1530, William Tyndale
published his English translation
of Genesis through Deuteronomy.
It was the first time
that the divine name appeared
in any English Bible.
The popular Reina-Valera Spanish Bible
was published in 1602.
It contains the divine name
throughout the Hebrew Scriptures.
This is a rare original first edition
of the English King James Version
of the Bible, published in 1611.
It uses the name Jehovah
in just four passages.
Still, the King James Version became
the most widely printed book in the world.
Some 200 years later,
Benjamin Boothroyd,
a minister and Hebrew scholar,
set out to revise the King James Version.
His 1817 translation
was the first English Bible
to use the divine name throughout
the Hebrew Scriptures.
Meanwhile, church missionaries
were taking the Bible to new lands.
But without the divine name,
people couldn’t distinguish
the God of the Bible
from their own false gods.
So Bible translations
in many languages of Asia,
Africa, the Pacific islands,
and the Americas included God’s name.
The Chinese Delegate’s Version from 1854
is an example of a missionary Bible
that uses God’s name throughout
the Hebrew Scriptures.
Still, there was
one more place where God’s name
was not yet restored
—the Christian Greek Scriptures.
This is the Nuremberg Polyglot,
published by Elias Hutter in 1599.
It contains the Christian Greek Scriptures
in 12 languages, including Hebrew.
Here,
John’s Gospel
quotes Psalm 118:26:
“Blessed is the one who comes
in Jehovah’s name.”
In his Hebrew translation of the Gospel,
Hutter preserved the divine name
in the quotation
from Psalms.
He did this in many other places
in the Greek Scriptures.
Translators had a precedent
to use God’s name
in the Christian Greek Scriptures
where the name appeared
in verses quoted from the Hebrew Scriptures.
This is the 1864 sixth edition
New Testament translation
by Herman Heinfetter.
It’s likely the first published
English Bible to use God’s name
in more than 100 places
in the Christian Greek Scriptures.
The New World Translation
of the Holy Scriptures
was first published between 1950 and 1960.
Its translators benefited
from the scholarly work of those before them
who had chosen to preserve God’s name
in their Bible translations.
Today, the New World Translation
is available in whole or in part
in over 170 languages.
God’s name, Jehovah,
belongs in the Holy Scriptures he inspired.
This gallery holds just a small part
of the overwhelming evidence to this fact.
The Bible is a precious gift from God,
teaching us
about his works, his qualities,
and his loving purpose
for humankind.
He invites each of us to read it,
to draw close to him, and to know him
by his most holy name, Jehovah.